README.md, before:

# Tests for Speech Rule Engine

This is a separate repository for maintaining and running tests for [Speech Rule Engine](https://speechruleengine.org).

The majority of tests is available in a JSON format.

## JSON format

``` json
{
  "factory": "Mandatory",
  "information": "Optional but recommended",
  "name": "Optional, necessary for analytics only",
  "base": "Optional filename",
  "active": "Optional filename for test output",
  "exclude": [],
  "_commentX_": "Optional",
  ... other test class specific entries
  "tests": "ALL" |
    {
    "test1": {
        "test": true|false,
        "input": "Optional",
        "expected": "Mandatory test output"
        ... other test specific fields
        }
    ... More uniquely named tests
    }
}
```

### Class Fields

| Field         | Required    | Usage                                                              |
| -----         | ----        | :-------                                                           |
| `factory`     | Mandatory   | Specifies the test class factory entry that is used for this test. |
| `information` | Recommended | Information on the test used as description for JEST testsuites.   |
|               |             | See below for description conventions                              |
| `name`        | Optional    | Name of the testsuite. This is necessary for analytics only,       |
|               |             | Analytics files are use this name as prefix and only tests         |
|               |             | that contain a `name` field will be compiled for analytics.        |
|               |             | Consequently, names should be unique. See below for conventions.   |
| `base`        | Optional    | Filename of the input file if this is _input test_.                |
|               |             | This is either an absolute path or relative to the input folder.   |
| `active`      | Optional    | Target filename for tests that produce output.                     |
|               |             | It is used to compile output tests and does not have to be unique. |
|               |             | This is either an absolute path or relative to the ouptut folder.  |
| `exclude`     | Optional    | List of tests to be excluded. Useful if loading from `base` files. |
| `tests`       | Mandatory   | `"ALL"` or Association list of named tests.                        |
|               |             | In case of an _input test_ `"ALL"` specifies that all tests from   |
|               |             | the base file should be run for the given test class.              |
| `...`         | Optional    | Other fields needed to intialise the test class.                   |



### Test Fields

| Field      | Required  | Usage                                                           |
| -----      | ----      | :-------                                                        |
| `test`     | Optional  | Boolean specifying if the test should be run. Default is `true` |
| `input`    | Mandatory | Input for the tests.                                            |
| `expected` | Optional  | The expected output. Can be omitted, for example, in the case   |
|            |           | of tests that compare output for two methods.                   |
| `...`      | Optional  | Other fields that are needed to run a test.                     |


### Input vs Expected only tests

We distinguish _input tests_ and _expected only tests_. The latter contain all
the information for the test in the single JSON object, while the former load
input information from a common `base` file, generally given in the `input`
directory.

The structure of `base` files is similar to the `expected` files. `expected`
files can suppress running of certain tests using the `excluded` field.  Fields
from the expected file overwrite those of the input file.

The non-JEST test runner outputs warnings in case input tests have no expected
value and are not explicitly excluded.

### Names

* `name`: Names are used as prefixes for output in the analytics module. As the
  output structure is flat, they should be unique. For speech rule tests they
  should be of the form `${Locale}${Domain}${Type}` and camel cased.
* `information` entries of speech rule tests are of a similar form: `"${Locale}
  ${Domain} ${Description}"`
* Names and information entries of other tests follow a similar pattern,
  starting with the description of the common aspect moving to the more
  specialised one. E.g.,


## Running Tests via Jest

There are multiple ways to run tests for SRE.

1. From within the `speech-rule-engine` repository with `sre-tests` as `git
   submodule`.
1. From within the `speech-rule-engine` repository with a local copy of the
   `sre-tests` repository.
1. From within the `sre-tests` repository with respect to a local copy of the
   `speech-rule-engine` repository.

The last case is the most common one used during development and is therefore described first.

### Local Tests in `sre-tests` Repo

First we need to tell the tests repo where SRE is located locally. This is by
setting the `SRE_JSON_PATH` variable, e.g., as

``` shell
export SRE_JSON_PATH=../speech-rule-engine/lib/mathmaps
```

**Note, that setting this path can lead to unpredictable behaviour if running SRE in that shell.**


``` shell
npm run prepare
```
will build all the necessary files for the tests as well as for analytics. Those
files will be

``` shell
npm run test
```
runs tests separately without producing output. So there are no interactions between single test suites.

``` shell
npm run test-output
```
runs output producing tests only. Combines tests that share common output files into a single suite.

``` shell
npm run test-all
```
runs first singleton tests and then output producing tests.

``` shell
npm run clean
```
Removes all files generated by transpiling and testing.

#### Running locales or subsets of tests

``` shell
npx jest --testPathPattern js/json/de/
```
will run German locale only.

``` shell
npx jest --testPathPattern js/json/de/clearspeak js/json/base
```
will run Clearspeak German tests and base tests.

### Running Tests via Make in the SRE repository

Run with
``` shell
make test (ENV=n)
```

`ENV` are optional environment parameters.



## Directory structure

### Basic structure

    ├── expected  JSON files with expected output of tests
    ├── input     JSON files with input of tests
    ├── output    Output files generated by tests (mainly HTML files)
    └── ts       Source files for tests

### Source directory structure

Source directory effectively consists of two parts:

1. Static sources that are used in test classes or for auxiliary task such as
   analytics or test generation.
2. Dynamic sources that are generated by the `tests.config.js` script and that
   actually run tests.

#### Static sources

    └── ts
        ├── analytics  Classes and utilities that run analytics on SRE.
        ├── base       Common files used by test classes.
        ├── classes    Classes for tests that take input and expected from JSON files.
        ├── generate   Utility methods to generate JSON test files from various sources.
        ├── tests      Test Classes that run tests via test functions.
        └── typings    Contains type definitions, e.g. for SRE.

#### Dynamic Sources

These sources are generated by running `npm run prepare` or the `build` function
from `tests.config.js`. They are removed with the `clean` function. The
generated files are of type `.test.ts` so they can be run with `jest` directly.

    └── ts
        ├── analyse    Files for running SRE analytics. There is on test file for every
        │              `.json` file that contains a `name` entry in the `expected` directory.
        │              Subdirectory structure is a mirror of the one in `expected`.
        ├── json       Runs all tests. There is one test file per `.json` file in the `expected` directory.
        │              Subdirectory structure is a mirror of the one in `expected`.
        │              Subdirectory structure is a mirror of the one in `expected`.
        └── output     Files for running tests that produce output. There is one file for each unique
                       entry given in the `active` field for test input files. That is, often multiple
                       test files are combined and run to generate on output file.
                       The directory structure is flat.


### Components of the Input directory

    └── input
        ├── base        Basic tests for components of the engine.
        ├── clearspeak  Speech tests for clearspeak rules.
        ├── common      Speech tests for common use (e.g., fonts, units)
        ├── mathspeak   Speech tests for mathspeak rules.
        └── nemeth      Speech tests for (Nemeth) Braille.


### Components of the Expected directory

    └── expected
        ├── base        Expected values for basic tests.
        ├── locale_1    Expected values for speech tests of locale_1.
        │               ....
        └── locale_n    Expected values for speech tests of locale_n.


### Conent of Expected directories by locales

    └── expected
        └── locale
            ├── clearspeak  Expected values for clearspeak tests
            ├── mathspeak   Expected values for mathspeak tests.
            ├── others      Expected values for all other speech rule tests (e.g., prefix, summary)
            └── symbols     Expected values for symbol tests (character, function, unit)
        │   ...
        └── nemeth
            ├── rules       Expected values for nemeth rules
            └── symbols     Expected values for symbol tests (character, function, unit)


### Components of the Output directory


    └── expected
        │               Potentially other files (with various extensions).
        │               ....
        ├── locale_1    HTML output for speech tests of locale_1.
        │               ....
        └── locale_n    HTML output for speech tests of locale_n.

## Current structure

    ├── expected
    │   ├── base
    │   ├── de
    │   │   ├── clearspeak
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── en
    │   │   ├── clearspeak
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── es
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── fr
    │   │   ├── clearspeak
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   └── nemeth
    │       ├── rules
    │       └── symbols
    ├── input
    │   ├── base
    │   ├── clearspeak
    │   ├── common
    │   ├── mathspeak
    │   └── nemeth
    ├── output
    │   ├── de
    │   ├── en
    │   │   ├── sheets
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── es
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── fr
    │   │   ├── functions
    │   │   ├── sheets
    │   │   ├── symbols
    │   │   └── units
    │   └── nemeth
    │       ├── functions
    │       ├── sheets
    │       ├── symbols
    │       └── units
    └── ts
        ├── base
        ├── classes
        └── tests


# Analytics

# Generators

Commit message:

Adds test generators and transformers for Braille and TeX.

README.md, after:

# Tests for Speech Rule Engine

This is a separate repository for maintaining and running tests for [Speech Rule Engine](https://speechruleengine.org).

The majority of tests is available in a JSON format.

## JSON format

``` json
{
  "factory": "Mandatory",
  "information": "Optional but recommended",
  "name": "Optional, necessary for analytics only",
  "base": "Optional filename",
  "active": "Optional filename for test output",
  "exclude": [],
  "_commentX_": "Optional",
  ... other test class specific entries
  "tests": "ALL" |
    {
    "test1": {
        "test": true|false,
        "input": "Optional",
        "expected": "Mandatory test output"
        ... other test specific fields
        }
    ... More uniquely named tests
    }
}
```

### Class Fields

| Field         | Required    | Usage                                                              |
| -----         | ----        | :-------                                                           |
| `factory`     | Mandatory   | Specifies the test class factory entry that is used for this test. |
| `information` | Recommended | Information on the test used as description for JEST testsuites.   |
|               |             | See below for description conventions                              |
| `name`        | Optional    | Name of the testsuite. This is necessary for analytics only,       |
|               |             | Analytics files are use this name as prefix and only tests         |
|               |             | that contain a `name` field will be compiled for analytics.        |
|               |             | Consequently, names should be unique. See below for conventions.   |
| `base`        | Optional    | Filename of the input file if this is _input test_.                |
|               |             | This is either an absolute path or relative to the input folder.   |
| `active`      | Optional    | Target filename for tests that produce output.                     |
|               |             | It is used to compile output tests and does not have to be unique. |
|               |             | This is either an absolute path or relative to the ouptut folder.  |
| `exclude`     | Optional    | List of tests to be excluded. Useful if loading from `base` files. |
| `tests`       | Mandatory   | `"ALL"` or Association list of named tests.                        |
|               |             | In case of an _input test_ `"ALL"` specifies that all tests from   |
|               |             | the base file should be run for the given test class.              |
| `...`         | Optional    | Other fields needed to intialise the test class.                   |



### Test Fields

| Field      | Required  | Usage                                                           |
| -----      | ----      | :-------                                                        |
| `test`     | Optional  | Boolean specifying if the test should be run. Default is `true` |
| `input`    | Mandatory | Input for the tests.                                            |
| `expected` | Optional  | The expected output. Can be omitted, for example, in the case   |
|            |           | of tests that compare output for two methods.                   |
| `...`      | Optional  | Other fields that are needed to run a test.                     |


### Input vs Expected only tests

We distinguish _input tests_ and _expected only tests_. The latter contain all
the information for the test in the single JSON object, while the former load
input information from a common `base` file, generally given in the `input`
directory.

The structure of `base` files is similar to the `expected` files. `expected`
 can suppress running of certain tests using the `excluded` field.  Fields
from the expected file overwrite those of the input file.

The non-JEST test runner outputs warnings in case input tests have no expected
value and are not explicitly excluded.

### Names

* `name`: Names are used as prefixes for output in the analytics module. As the
  output structure is flat, they should be unique. For speech rule tests they
  should be of the form `${Locale}${Domain}${Type}` and camel cased.
* `information` entries of speech rule tests are of a similar form: `"${Locale}
  ${Domain} ${Description}"`
* Names and information entries of other tests follow a similar pattern,
  starting with the description of the common aspect moving to the more
  specialised one. E.g.,


## Running Tests via Jest

There are multiple ways to run tests for SRE.

1. From within the `speech-rule-engine` repository with `sre-tests` as `git
   submodule`.
1. From within the `speech-rule-engine` repository with a local copy of the
   `sre-tests` repository.
1. From within the `sre-tests` repository with respect to a local copy of the
   `speech-rule-engine` repository.

The last case is the most common one used during development and is therefore described first.

### Local Tests in `sre-tests` Repo

First we need to tell the tests repo where SRE is located locally. This is by
setting the `SRE_JSON_PATH` variable, e.g., as

``` shell
export SRE_JSON_PATH=../speech-rule-engine/lib/mathmaps
```

**Note, that setting this path can lead to unpredictable behaviour if running SRE in that shell.**


``` shell
npm run prepare
```
will build all the necessary files for the tests as well as for analytics. Those
files will be

``` shell
npm run test
```
runs tests separately without producing output. So there are no interactions between single test suites.

``` shell
npm run test-output
```
runs output producing tests only. Combines tests that share common output files into a single suite.

``` shell
npm run test-all
```
runs first singleton tests and then output producing tests.

``` shell
npm run clean
```
Removes all files generated by transpiling and testing.

#### Running locales or subsets of tests

``` shell
npx jest --testPathPattern js/json/de/
```
will run German locale only.

``` shell
npx jest --testPathPattern js/json/de/clearspeak js/json/base
```
will run Clearspeak German tests and base tests.

### Running Tests via Make in the SRE repository

Run with
``` shell
make test (ENV=n)
```

`ENV` are optional environment parameters.



## Directory structure

### Basic structure

    ├── expected  JSON files with expected output of tests
    ├── input     JSON files with input of tests
    ├── output    Output files generated by tests (mainly HTML files)
    └── ts       Source files for tests

### Source directory structure

Source directory effectively consists of two parts:

1. Static sources that are used in test classes or for auxiliary task such as
   analytics or test generation.
2. Dynamic sources that are generated by the `tests.config.js` script and that
   actually run tests.

#### Static sources

    └── ts
        ├── analytics  Classes and utilities that run analytics on SRE.
        ├── base       Common files used by test classes.
        ├── classes    Classes for tests that take input and expected from JSON files.
        ├── generate   Utility methods to generate JSON test files from various sources.
        ├── tests      Test Classes that run tests via test functions.
        └── typings    Contains type definitions, e.g. for SRE.

#### Dynamic Sources

These sources are generated by running `npm run prepare` or the `build` function
from `tests.config.js`. They are removed with the `clean` function. The
generated files are of type `.test.ts` so they can be run with `jest` directly.

    └── ts
        ├── analyse    Files for running SRE analytics. There is on test file for every
        │              `.json` file that contains a `name` entry in the `expected` directory.
        │              Subdirectory structure is a mirror of the one in `expected`.
        ├── json       Runs all tests. There is one test file per `.json` file in the `expected` directory.
        │              Subdirectory structure is a mirror of the one in `expected`.
        │              Subdirectory structure is a mirror of the one in `expected`.
        └── output     Files for running tests that produce output. There is one file for each unique
                       entry given in the `active` field for test input files. That is, often multiple
                       test files are combined and run to generate on output file.
                       The directory structure is flat.


### Components of the Input directory

    └── input
        ├── base        Basic tests for components of the engine.
        ├── clearspeak  Speech tests for clearspeak rules.
        ├── common      Speech tests for common use (e.g., fonts, units)
        ├── mathspeak   Speech tests for mathspeak rules.
        └── nemeth      Speech tests for (Nemeth) Braille.


### Components of the Expected directory

    └── expected
        ├── base        Expected values for basic tests.
        ├── locale_1    Expected values for speech tests of locale_1.
        │               ....
        └── locale_n    Expected values for speech tests of locale_n.


### Conent of Expected directories by locales

    └── expected
        └── locale
            ├── clearspeak  Expected values for clearspeak tests
            ├── mathspeak   Expected values for mathspeak tests.
            ├── others      Expected values for all other speech rule tests (e.g., prefix, summary)
            └── symbols     Expected values for symbol tests (character, function, unit)
        │   ...
        └── nemeth
            ├── rules       Expected values for nemeth rules
            └── symbols     Expected values for symbol tests (character, function, unit)


### Components of the Output directory


    └── expected
        │               Potentially other files (with various extensions).
        │               ....
        ├── locale_1    HTML output for speech tests of locale_1.
        │               ....
        └── locale_n    HTML output for speech tests of locale_n.

## Current structure

    ├── expected
    │   ├── base
    │   ├── de
    │   │   ├── clearspeak
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── en
    │   │   ├── clearspeak
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── es
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── fr
    │   │   ├── clearspeak
    │   │   ├── mathspeak
    │   │   ├── others
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   └── nemeth
    │       ├── rules
    │       └── symbols
    ├── input
    │   ├── base
    │   ├── clearspeak
    │   ├── common
    │   ├── mathspeak
    │   └── nemeth
    ├── output
    │   ├── de
    │   ├── en
    │   │   ├── sheets
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── es
    │   │   └── symbols
    │   ├── fr
    │   │   ├── functions
    │   │   ├── sheets
    │   │   ├── symbols
    │   │   └── units
    │   └── nemeth
    │       ├── functions
    │       ├── sheets
    │       ├── symbols
    │       └── units
    └── ts
        ├── base
        ├── classes
        └── tests


# Analytics

Run with

``` shell
npm run prepare
npm run test:analytics
```

This will generate SRE analytics in the `analysis` folder. In particular it will
generate the following subfolders, which contains json files of the following
nature:

    ├── allRules            List of all rules available in each rule set.
    ├── applicableRules     List of all rules applicable rules for each test run.
    ├── appliedRules        List of all actually applied rules for each test run.
    ├── diffAppliedRules    Difference list of rules applied and available for each rule set.
    │                       Full test coverage for a rule set means that this list is empty.
    └── uniqueAppliedRules  List of all unique rules applied during tests for test suite.


# Generators
